#summary How to use stemming (enabling to search the plural form and get results for the singular form, etc.)

= Introduction =

Stemming is the action of reducing a word to it's root. For instance, the words connection, connections,
connective, connected and connecting can all be reduced to a common root "connect". For more
information, see [http://www.xapian.org/docs/stemming.html this document].

This feature is available in Djapian since SVN revision 67.

= Stemming in Djapian =

To use stemming in Djapian, you must first define a variable in the settings.py file of your Django project:

{{{
# For a complete list of supported languages, see :
# http://www.xapian.org/docs/apidoc/html/classXapian_1_1Stem.html#d4adbe1617ce7c54c3aa7d3d67d407bd
DJAPIAN_STEMMING_LANG = "en"
}}}

That's all there is to do. When Djapian detects the DJAPIAN_STEMMING_LANG is defined, it will use stemming when indexing the documents, and will stem the search query.

*Important* : For stemming to work, the index must be build with stemming enabled. You may have to rebuild your index if it was not build with stemming.

For now, Djapian supports only one language for stemming. Per-document language support will be added soon.

= Implementation notes =

== Xapian's stemming API -­ A simple program ==
This simple Python code illustrates how Xapian's stemming API works :

{{{
import xapian
st = xapian.Stem("en") # or "fr" or any other supported language
print st("dogs"), st("are"), st("running")
}}}

This program will print out "dog are run" on the standard output. To stem a word we use the operator ()
on an instance of the class Stem. This explain the strange syntax of {{{st("dogs")}}} to get the stem of the
word "dogs".

== Stemming the search query ==
The QueryParser class in Xapian is used to parse a query entered by the user into Query object that
Xapian can understand. For instance, the following query:

 Who let the dogs out?

Results in the following Query object:

{{{
QUERY: Xapian::Query((who:(pos=1) AND let:(pos=2) AND the:(pos=3) AND dogs:(pos=4) AND out:(pos=5)))
}}}

When using a stemming algorithm, the resulting Query object is the following:

{{{
QUERY: Xapian::Query((who:(pos=1) AND Zlet:(pos=2) AND Zthe:(pos=3) AND Zdog:(pos=4) AND Zout:(pos=5))
}}}

Observe that the word "dogs" was reduced to it's root "dog", and that all words excepted the first are now prefixed with a capital Z. This mean that in order to use stemming, the database must also be constructed with stemmed words prefixed with capital Z.

=== Code example ===
This code will create a stemmed query, like the example in the previous section. This code is currently implemented in the parse_query function of XapianIndexer in xap.py.

{{{
import xapian
query_parser = xapian.QueryParser()
query_parser.set_default_op(xapian.Query.OP_AND)
query_parser.set_stemmer(xapian.Stem("en"))
query_parser.set_stemming_strategy(xapian.QueryParser.STEM_SOME)
parsed_query = query_parser.parse_query("Who let the dogs out?")
print parsed_query
}}}

== Stemming at indexation time ==
In order to support both stemmed and non-stemmed search queries, Djapian indexes documents with both stemmed and non-stemmed forms. For instance, the following phrase :

 Who let the dogs out?

Would result in the following terms being indexed :

 who let the dogs out Zwho Zlet Zthe Zdog Zout

This is performed in the update() function of XapianIndexer in xap.py.